# ICTC13

## Algal-rithm: Automated Classification of Harmful Microalgae using Convolutional Neural Network


Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are a widespread issue that can cause economic disturbance and contaminate drinking water through the release of toxins, harmful secondary metabolites, and the formation of scum. Existing monitoring techniques are arduous and expensive, resulting in poor bloom characterization. HABs have become of increasing concern due to anthropogenic eutrophication increasing the frequency of bloom events. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied for automation in various fields. Applying CNNs to automate HAB characterization could help lower costs and shorten the decision-making process. A collection of a diverse, abundant dataset of key HAB species will be fundamental in realising automation. The dataset will concentrate on filamentous HAB species, as the variability in trichrome length and cell number presents challenges for both classification and enumeration. A 600-image dataset of Dolichospermum flos-aquae CCAP 1403/13E and Nodularia spumigena PCC 73104 was collected. Six model architectures, three custom architectures (ThreeConv3x3, ThreeConv4x4 and TwoConv3x3) and three existing architectures (AlexNet, VGG16 and EfficentNet), two filters (Morphological, High Pass) and two optimizers (SGD, Adam) were trialled in combination to assess dataset collection methodology and outline initial classification accuracy. The combination AlexNet, Morphological and Adam achieved the highest average accuracy of 87.89% and a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.76. The results highlight the potential for automated HAB characterization and validates the methodology used for dataset collection.  

Alenza Lancaster, Professor Linda Lawton, Dr Pamela Johnston, Dr Carlos Pestana, Dr Ismael Carloto
